Mourinho said: 'My feeling is that we were closer to 4-0 than they were to 3-1 but this is the Premier League. I think my players paid the price for a very difficult week.'
West Ham's late flurry, as they had done in their previous home game in the 3-2 reverse to Newcastle, came far too late, and it is now five league defeats in the last six for Pellegrini. After the whirlwind events of the international break, it is they who desperately need revitalising.
A refreshed Mourinho imbued confidence from the moment he came off the team coach in east London, taking over a team mid-season for the first time since swapping Uniao de Leiria for Porto as a 38-year-old in early 2002.
The Portuguese spoke of needing to 'trust the base' he inherited from Mauricio Pochettino - and there was a devastating spell either side of the interval that bore all the hallmarks of his predecessor's side at their swash-buckling best.
Mourinho needed to hit the ground running and, after an opening half an hour low on quality, Dele Alli found the run of Son and he finished low beneath Roberto.
The Spanish goalkeeper had been ironically cheered by his own supporters during an error-strewn first half that got worse for the hosts when Alli was the architect once more for Spurs' second.
A month can be a very long time in football and, having responded well to his critics in his last away league game at Everton, Alli showed immense dexterity in keeping the ball in play to release Son.
The South Korean spotted the run of Moura at the far post, with the Brazilian getting in front of Aaron Cresswell to blast home his third goal of the season.
Mourinho pointed passionately towards Alli for his role in the goal, but not even the half-time whistle could stem the tide for the beleaguered hosts as Kane was soon celebrating his customary goal in a London derby.
Ogbonna was no match for the England captain as he rose to head in Serge Aurier's pinpoint cross. It was Kane's eighth goal in his last nine Premier League games against West Ham, and his 29th in 46 Premier League London derbies.
The game appeared over as a contest, but by the end it emulated Pochettino's reign in microcosm, serving as a reminder of the work ahead for Mourinho.
Antonio began the unlikeliest of comebacks when he allowed Mark Noble's pass to run across his body, losing Toby Alderweireld to strike beyond Paulo Gazzaniga.
West Ham were denied a second when Declan Rice's close-range finish from Sebastien Haller's knock-down was ruled out by VAR Andre Marriner.
The Hammers did find a second in the final minute of stoppage time when Ogbonna headed in Robert Snodgrass' corner - but it would not deny Mourinho victory on his return to management.
Jose is back and the cameras just can't get enough of him.
The new Spurs head coach was laughing and joking in the tunnel as his players were preparing to come onto the pitch and he was still smiling at the end of the game.
Mourinho waited to congratulate every one of his players before leaving the pitch and there were a few claps for the Spurs fans too.
It's still strange to see Mourinho managing Spurs but we're all going to have to get used to it - especially if his side play like they did for the first hour here.
This Spurs squad looks much stronger than the group of players he had in his final months at Manchester United.
Mauricio Pochettino has left him an incredible legacy - the stadium, the squad and the training ground are all world class. Now Mourinho just needs to sort out the defence - and win a trophy.
Having lost his first competitive game as a manager, with Benfica in September 2000, Mourinho has gone unbeaten in his first game in charge at each of his eight clubs since, winning five - and his latest triumph owed plenty to Son's inimitable energy.
The South Korean is Tottenham's leading goalscorer in all competitions in 2019, netting one more than Kane (19) so far this calendar year, but it was his defensive work during West Ham's recovery that was equally as impressive.
Son regained possession 10 times for his side - only Aurier (13) did so on more occasions, and he was a constant outlet.